HYPNOTICS AND SEDATIVES 
A sedative drug decreases activity, moderates excitement, and calms; a hypnotic drug produces drowsiness and facilitates the onset and maintenance of a state of sleep resembling natural sleep and from which the recipient can be aroused easily. The sleep induced by hypnotic drugs does not resemble the artificially induced passive state of suggestibility also called hypnosis. 
BENZODIAZEPINES 
All benzodiazepines in clinical use have the capacity to promote the binding of the major inhibitory neurotransmitter g-aminobutyric acid (GABA) to GABAA receptors, thereby enhancing the GABAinduced ionic currents through these channels (see Chapter 12). Pharmacological investigations have provided evidence for heterogeneity among sites of binding and action of benzodiazepines and for heterogeneity of subunit composition of the GABA-gated chloride channels of different neurons. A number of distinct mechanisms of action are thought to contribute to the sedative-hypnotic, muscle-relaxant, anxiolytic, and anticonvulsant effects of the benzodiazepines, and specific subunits of the GABAA receptor are responsible for specific pharmacological properties of benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines exert qualitatively similar clinical effects, quantitative differences in their pharmacodynamic spectra and pharmacokinetic properties have led to varying patterns of therapeutic application.
Pharmacological Properties 
Virtually all effects of the benzodiazepines result from their actions on the central nervous system (CNS). The most prominent of these effects are sedation, hypnosis, decreased anxiety, muscle relaxation, anterograde amnesia, and anticonvulsant activity. Only two effects of these drugs result from peripheral actions: coronary vasodilation, seen after intravenous administration of therapeutic doses of certain benzodiazepines, and neuromuscular blockade, seen only with very high doses. A number of benzodiazepine-like effects are classified as full agonistic effects (i.e., faithfully mimicking agents such as diazepam with relatively low fractional occupancy of binding sites) or partial agonistic effects (i.e., producing less intense maximal effects and/or requiring relatively high fractional occupancy compared with agents such as diazepam). Some compounds produce effects opposite to those of diazepam in the absence of benzodiazepine-like agonists and are termed inverse agonists; partial inverse agonists also have been recognized (see Chapter 1 for a discussion of inverse agonism). The vast majority of effects of agonists and inverse agonists can be reversed or prevented by the benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil, which competes with agonists and inverse agonists for binding to the GABAA receptor.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
While benzodiazepines affect activity at all levels of the neuraxis, some structures are affected preferentially. The benzodiazepines do not produce the same degrees of neuronal depression as do barbiturates and volatile anesthetics. Although the benzodiazepines have similar pharmacological profiles, the drugs differ in selectivity and thus in clinical utility. As the dose of a benzodiazepine is increased, sedation progresses to hypnosis and then to stupor. The clinical literature often refers to the “anesthetic” effects and uses of certain benzodiazepines, but the drugs do not cause a true general anesthesia because awareness usually persists, and relaxation sufficient to allow surgery cannot be achieved. However, at “preanesthetic” doses, there is amnesia for events subsequent to administration of the drug, possibly creating the illusion of previous anesthesia. Separating the anxiolytic actions of benzodiazepines from their sedative-hypnotic effects is problematic; measurements of anxiety and sedation are difficult in human beings, and the validity of animal models for anxiety and sedation is uncertain.
Tolerance to Benzodiazepines; Selectivity
Although most patients who ingest benzodiazepines chronically report that drowsiness wanes over a few days, tolerance to the impairment of some measures of psychomotor performance (e.g., visual tracking) usually is not observed. The development of tolerance to the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines is a subject of debate. Some benzodiazepines induce muscle hypotonia without interfering with normal locomotion and can decrease rigidity in patients with cerebral palsy. In contrast to effects in animals, there is only a limited selectivity in human beings. Clonazepam in nonsedative doses does cause muscle relaxation, but diazepam and most other benzodiazepines do not. Tolerance occurs to the muscle relaxant and ataxic effects of these drugs. Experimentally, benzodiazepines inhibit some types of seizure activity. Clonazepam, nitrazepam, and nordazepam have more selective anticonvulsant activity than most other benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines also suppress ethanol-withdrawal seizures in human beings. However, the development of tolerance to the anticonvulsant effects has limited the usefulness of benzodiazepines in the treatment of recurrent seizure disorders (see Chapter 19). Only transient analgesia is apparent in humans after intravenous administration of benzodiazepines. Such effects actually may involve the production of amnesia. Unlike barbiturates, benzodiazepines do not cause hyperalgesia.
Effects on the Electroencephalogram and Sleep Stages
The effects of benzodiazepines on the waking electroencephalogram (EEG) resemble those of other sedative-hypnotic drugs. Alpha activity is decreased, but there is an increase in low-voltage fast activity. Tolerance occurs to these effects. Most benzodiazepines decrease sleep latency, especially when first used, and diminish the number of awakenings and the time spent in stage 0 (a stage of wakefulness). Time in stage 1 (descending drowsiness) usually is decreased, and there is a prominent decrease in the time spent in slow-wave sleep (stages 3 and 4). Most benzodiazepines increase the time from onset of spindle sleep to the first burst of rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep. The time spent in REM sleep usually is shortened, but the number of cycles of REM sleep cycles usually is increased, mostly late in the sleep time. Zolpidem and zaleplon suppress REM sleep to a lesser extent and thus may be superior to benzodiazepines for use as hypnotics. Benzodiazepine administration typically increases total sleep time, largely because of increased time spent in stage 2 (the major fraction of non-REM sleep). The effect is greatest in subjects with the shortest baseline total sleep time. Despite the increased number of REM cycles, the number of shifts to lighter sleep stages (1 and 0) and the amount of body movement are diminished. Nocturnal peaks in the secretion of growth hormone, prolactin, and luteinizing hormone are not affected. During chronic nocturnal use of benzodiazepines, the effects on the various stages of sleep usually decline within a few nights. With discontinuation of drug, the pattern of druginduced changes in sleep parameters may “rebound,” with an increase in the amount and density of REM sleep. If the dosage has not been excessive, patients usually will note only a shortening of sleep time rather than an exacerbation of insomnia. Benzodiazepine use usually imparts a sense of deep or refreshing sleep. It is uncertain to which effect on sleep parameters this feeling can be attributed. As a result, variations in the pharmacokinetic properties of individual benzodiazepines appear to be much more important determinants of their effects on sleep than are any potential differences in their pharmacodynamic properties.
Molecular Targets for Benzodiazepine Actions in the CNS
Benzodiazepines likely exert most of their effects by interacting with inhibitory neurotransmitter receptors directly activated by GABA. Benzodiazepines act at GABAA (ionotropic) receptors (but not at GABAB [metabotropic] receptors [GPCRs]) by binding to a specific site that is distinct from that of GABA binding. Unlike barbiturates, benzodiazepines do not activate GABAA receptors directly but rather require GABA to express their effects; i.e., they only modulate the effects of GABA. Benzodiazepines and related compounds can act as agonists, antagonists, or inverse agonists at the benzodiazepine-binding site on GABAA receptors. Agonists at the benzodiazepine-binding site shift the GABA concentration–response curve to the left, increasing the amount of chloride current generated by GABAAreceptor activation; inverse agonists shift the curve to the right, reducing the effect of given concentration of GABA. Both these effects are blocked by antagonists at the benzodiazepine-binding site. A pure antagonist (e.g., flumazenil) acting alone at this binding site does not affect GABAA-receptor function but can reverse the effects of high doses of benzodiazepines. The behavioral and electrophysiological effects of benzodiazepines also can be reduced or prevented by prior treatment with antagonists at the GABA-binding site (e.g., bicuculline).
GABAA Receptor-Mediated Electrical Events: In Vivo Properties
The remarkable safety of the benzodiazepines is likely related to the fact that their effects in vivo depend on the presynaptic release of GABA; in the absence of GABA, benzodiazepines have no effects on GABAA receptor function. Although barbiturates also enhance the effects of GABA at low concentrations, they directly activate GABA receptors at higher concentrations, which can lead to profound CNS depression (see below). Further, the behavioral and sedative effects of benzodiazepines can be ascribed in part to potentiation of GABA-ergic pathways that serve to regulate the firing of neurons containing various monoamines (see Chapter 12). These neurons are known to promote behavioral arousal and are important mediators of the inhibitory effects of fear and punishment on behavior. Finally, inhibitory effects on muscular hypertonia or the spread of seizure activity can be rationalized by potentiation of inhibitory GABA-ergic circuits at various levels of the neuraxis.
Molecular Basis for Benzodiazepine Regulation of GABAA Receptor-Mediated Electrical Events
The enhancement of GABA-induced chloride currents by benzodiazepines results primarily from an increase in the frequency of bursts of chloride channel opening produced by submaximal amounts of GABA. Inhibitory synaptic transmission measured after stimulation of afferent fibers is potentiated by benzodiazepines at therapeutically relevant concentrations. Measurements of GABAA receptor-mediated currents indicate that benzodiazepines shift the GABA concentration– response curve to the left without increasing the maximum current evoked with GABA, consistent with a model in which benzodiazepines exert their major actions by increasing the gain of inhibitory neurotransmission mediated by GABAA receptors. Some data are difficult to reconcile with the hypothesis that actions at GABAA receptors mediate all effects of benzodiazepines. Low concentrations of benzodiazepines that are not blocked by bicuculline or picrotoxin induce depressant effects on hippocampal neurons; the induction of sleep in rats by benzodiazepines also is insensitive to bicuculline or picrotoxin but is prevented by flumazenil. At higher (hypnotic/amnesic) concentrations, actions of the benzodiazepines may involve other mechanisms, including inhibition of the uptake of adenosine and the resulting potentiation of its actions as a neuronal depressant, as well as the GABA-independent inhibition of Ca2+ currents, Ca2+-dependent neurotransmitter release, and tetrodotoxin-sensitive Na+ channels. The macromolecular complex containing GABA-regulated chloride channels also may be a site of action of general anesthetics, ethanol, inhaled drugs of abuse, and certain metabolites of endogenous steroids.
RESPIRATION
Hypnotic doses of benzodiazepines are without effect on respiration in normal adult subjects, but special care must be taken in the treatment of children and individuals with impaired hepatic function (e.g., alcoholics). At higher doses, such as those used for preanesthetic medication or for endoscopy, benzodiazepines slightly depress alveolar ventilation and cause respiratory acidosis as the result of a decrease in hypoxic rather than hypercapnic drive; these effects are exaggerated in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and alveolar hypoxia and/or CO2 narcosis may result. These drugs can cause apnea during anesthesia or when given with opioids. Patients severely intoxicated with benzodiazepines only require respiratory assistance when they also have ingested another CNS-depressant drug, most commonly ethanol. In contrast, hypnotic doses of benzodiazepines may worsen sleep-related breathing disorders by adversely affecting control of the upper airway muscles or by decreasing the ventilatory response to CO2 . The latter effect may cause hypoventilation and hypoxemia in some patients with severe COPD, although benzodiazepines may improve sleep and sleep structure in some instances. In patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), hypnotic doses of benzodiazepines may exaggerate the impact of apneic episodes on alveolar hypoxia, pulmonary hypertension, and cardiac ventricular load. Caution should be exercised with patients who snore regularly: partial airway obstruction may be converted to OSA under the influence of these drugs.
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
The cardiovascular effects of benzodiazepines are minor in normal subjects except in severe intoxication. In preanesthetic doses, all benzodiazepines decrease blood pressure and increase heart rate.
GI TRACT
Despite anecdotal reports that benzodiazepines improve a variety of “anxietyrelated” GI disorders, there is a paucity of evidence. Diazepam markedly decreases nocturnal gastric acid secretion in human beings, but other agents are considerably more effective in acid-peptic disorders
ABSORPTION, FATE, AND EXCRETION
The physicochemical and pharmacokinetic properties of the benzodiazepines affect their clinical utility. All have high lipid–water distribution coefficients in the nonionized form; nevertheless, lipophilicity varies more than 50-fold according to the polarity and electronegativity of various substituents. 
All benzodiazepines are absorbed completely, with the exception of clorazepate; this drug is decarboxylated rapidly in gastric juice to N-desmethyldiazepam (nordazepam), which subsequently is absorbed completely. Some benzodiazepines (e.g., prazepam and flurazepam) reach the systemic circulation only in the form of active metabolites. Drugs active at the benzodiazepine receptor may be divided into four categories based on their elimination half-lives: (1) ultrashort acting; (2) short-acting (t1/2 <6 hours): triazolam, the nonbenzodiazepine zolpidem (t1/2 ∼2 hours), and zopiclone (t1/2 = 5–6 hours); (3) intermediate-acting (t1/2 = 6–24 hours): estazolam and temazepam; and (4) long-acting (t1/2 >24 hours): flurazepam, diazepam, and quazepam. The extent of binding of benzodiazepines and their metabolites to plasma proteins correlates with lipid solubility and ranges from ∼70% (alprazolam) to nearly 99% (diazepam). The concentration in the cerebrospinal fluid is approximately equal to the concentration of free drug in plasma. There is rapid uptake of benzodiazepines into the brain and other highly perfused organs after intravenous administration (or oral administration of a rapidly absorbed compound), followed by redistribution into tissues that are less well perfused (e.g., muscle and fat). Redistribution is most rapid for drugs with the highest lipid solubility. In the regimens used for nighttime sedation, the rate of redistribution sometimes can have a greater influence than the rate of biotransformation on the duration of CNS effects. Redistribution kinetics of lipophilic benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) is complicated by enterohepatic circulation. The volumes of distribution of the benzodiazepines are large and in many cases are increased in elderly patients. These drugs cross the placental barrier and are secreted into breast milk. The benzodiazepines are metabolized extensively by CYPs, particularly CYP 3A4 and 2C19. Some benzodiazepines (e.g., oxazepam) are conjugated directly. Erythromycin, clarithromycin, ritonavir, itraconazole, ketoconazole, nefazodone, and grapefruit juice are inhibitors of CYP 3A4 and can affect the metabolism of benzodiazepines. Because active metabolites of some benzodiazepines are biotransformed more slowly than are the parent compounds, the duration of action of many benzodiazepines bears little relationship to the t1/2 of elimination of the drug that has been administered (e.g., the t1/2 of flurazepam in plasma is ∼2 hours, but that of a major active metabolite N-desalkylflurazepam is ∼50 hours). Conversely, the rate of biotransformation of agents that are inactivated by the initial reaction is an important determinant of their duration of action; these agents include oxazepam, lorazepam, temazepam, triazolam, and midazolam. Metabolism of the benzodiazepines occurs in three major stages. In general terms, the substituent at position 1 (or 2) of the diazepine ring is rapidly removed or modified to form metabolites that frequently are biologically active; then position 3 is more slowly hydroxylated, yielding derivatives that are generally active; finally the 3-OH compounds are conjugated with glucuronic acid to inactive products. Because benzodiazepines do not significantly induce the synthesis of hepatic CYPs, chronic benzodiazepine administration usually does not result in the accelerated metabolism of benzodiazepines or other substances. Cimetidine and oral contraceptives inhibit N-dealkylation and 3-hydroxylation of benzodiazepines, as do ethanol, isoniazid, and phenytoin to a lesser degree. These reactions usually are reduced to a greater extent in elderly patients and in patients with chronic liver disease than are those involving conjugation. An ideal hypnotic agent would have a rapid onset of action when taken at bedtime, a sufficiently sustained action to facilitate sleep throughout the night, and no residual action by the following morning. Triazolam theoretically fits this description most closely. Because of the slow rate of elimination of desalkylflurazepam, flurazepam (or quazepam) might seem to be unsuitable for this purpose. In practice, there appear to be some disadvantages to the use of agents that have a relatively rapid rate of disappearance, including the early-morning insomnia that is experienced by some patients and a greater likelihood of rebound insomnia on drug discontinuation. With careful selection of dosage, flurazepam and other benzodiazepines with slower rates of elimination than triazolam can be used effectively
Therapeutic Uses
The therapeutic uses and routes of administration of individual benzodiazepines marketed in the U.S. are summarized in Table 16–2. Note that most benzodiazepines can be used interchangeably. Benzodiazepines used as anticonvulsants have a long t1/2, and rapid entry into the brain is required for efficacy in treatment of status epilepticus. A short elimination t1/2 is desirable for hypnotics, although this carries the drawback of increased abuse liability and severity of withdrawal after drug discontinuation. Antianxiety agents should have a long t1/2 despite the risk of neuropsychological deficits caused by drug accumulation.
UNTOWARD EFFECTS
At the time of peak concentration in plasma, hypnotic doses of benzodiazepines cause varying degrees of lightheadedness, lassitude, increased reaction time, motor incoordination, impairment of mental and motor functions, confusion, and anterograde amnesia. Cognition appears to be affected less than motor performance. All these effects can greatly impair driving and other psychomotor skills, especially if combined with ethanol. These doserelated residual effects can be insidious because most subjects underestimate the degree of their impairment. Residual daytime sleepiness also may occur. The intensity and incidence of CNS toxicity generally increase with age. Other relatively common side effects are weakness, headache, blurred vision, vertigo, nausea and vomiting, epigastric distress, and diarrhea; joint pains, chest pains, and incontinence are much rarer. Anticonvulsant benzodiazepines sometimes actually increase the frequency of seizures in patients with epilepsy. Possible adverse effects of altered sleep patterns are discussed below.
Adverse Psychological Effects
Benzodiazepines may cause paradoxical effects. Flurazepam occasionally increases the incidence of nightmares—especially during the first week of use—and sometimes causes garrulousness, anxiety, irritability, tachycardia, and sweating. Amnesia, euphoria, restlessness, hallucinations, and hypomanic behavior have been reported to occur during use of various benzodiazepines. The release of bizarre uninhibited behavior occurs in some users; hostility and rage may occur in others; these are referred to as disinhibition or dyscontrol reactions. Paranoia, depression, and suicidal ideation also occasionally may accompany the use of these agents. Such paradoxical or disinhibition reactions are rare and appear to be dose-related. Because of reports of an increased incidence of confusion and abnormal behaviors, triazolam has been banned in the U.K., although the FDA declared triazolam to be safe and effective in low doses of 0.125–0.25 mg. Surveys in the U.K. after the ban found that patients did not have fewer side effects with replacement treatments. Chronic benzodiazepine use poses a risk for development of dependence and abuse, but not to the same extent as seen with older sedatives and other recognized drugs of abuse. Mild dependence may develop in many patients who have taken therapeutic doses of benzodiazepines on a regular basis for prolonged periods. Withdrawal symptoms may include temporary intensification of the problems that originally prompted their use (e.g., insomnia or anxiety). Dysphoria, irritability, sweating, unpleasant dreams, tremors, anorexia, and faintness or dizziness also may occur, especially when withdrawal of the benzodiazepine occurs abruptly; it is prudent to taper the dosage gradually to discontinue therapy. Nonetheless, benzodiazepines are relatively safe drugs. Even huge doses are rarely fatal unless other drugs are taken concomitantly, and true coma is uncommon in the absence of another CNS depressant (e.g., ethanol). Although overdosage with a benzodiazepine rarely causes severe cardiovascular or respiratory depression, therapeutic doses can further compromise respiration in patients with COPD or OSA. Abuse of benzodiazepines includes the use of flunitrazepam (ROHYPNOL) as a “date-rape” drug
Adverse Effects and Drug Interactions
A variety of allergic, hepatotoxic, and hematologic reactions to the benzodiazepines may occur, but the incidence is quite low; these reactions have been associated with the use of flurazepam and triazolam but not with temazepam. Large doses taken just before or during labor may cause hypothermia, hypotonia, and mild respiratory depression in the neonate. Abuse by the pregnant mother can result in a withdrawal syndrome in the newborn. Except for additive effects with other sedative or hypnotic drugs, reports of clinically important pharmacodynamic interactions between benzodiazepines and other drugs have been infrequent. Ethanol increases both the rate of absorption of benzodiazepines and the associated CNS depression. Valproate and benzodiazepines in combination may cause psychotic episodes.
Novel Benzodiazepine-Receptor Agonists: Zolpidem and Zalephon
Hypnotics that are structurally dissimilar to benzodiazepines include zolpicone (not available in the U.S.), zolpidem (AMBIENT), zaleplon (SONATA), and indiplon (under review by the FDA); presumably, their therapeutic efficacies are due to agonist effects at the benzodiazepine site of the GABAA receptor.
Zaleplon and zolpidem are effective in relieving sleep-onset insomnia. The two drugs have similar efficacies and both display sustained hypnotic efficacy without occurrence of rebound insomnia on abrupt discontinuation. Late-night administration of zolpidem has been associated with morning sedation, delayed reaction time, and anterograde amnesia, whereas zaleplon has no more side effects than placebo. Tolerance to zaleplon does not appear to occur, nor do rebound insomnia or withdrawal symptoms after stopping treatment. Unlike the benzodiazepines, zolpidem has little effect on the stages of sleep in normal human subjects. The drug is as effective as benzodiazepines in shortening sleep latency and prolonging total sleep time in patients with insomnia. After discontinuation of zolpidem, the beneficial effects on sleep reportedly persist for up to 1 week, but mild rebound insomnia on the first night also has occurred. Tolerance and physical dependence develop only rarely. An extended-release formulation of zolpidem (AMBIEN CR) is now marketed in the U.S.
Flumazenil: A Benzodiazepine-Receptor Antagonist
Flumazenil (ROMAZICON) is an imidazobenzodiazepine that behaves as a specific benzodiazepine antagonist. Flumazenil binds with high affinity to specific sites on the GABAA receptor, where it competitively antagonizes the binding and allosteric effects of benzodiazepines and other ligands. The drug antagonizes both the electrophysiological and behavioral effects of agonist and inverseagonist benzodiazepines and b-carbolines. Anticonvulsant effects cannot be relied on for therapeutic utility because the administration of flumazenil may precipitate seizures under certain circumstances (see below). Flumazenil is available only for intravenous administration. Although absorbed rapidly after oral administration, <25% of the drug reaches the systemic circulation owing to extensive firstpass hepatic metabolism; effective oral doses are apt to cause headache and dizziness. On intravenous administration, flumazenil is eliminated almost entirely by hepatic metabolism to inactive products with a t1/2 of about 1 hour; the duration of clinical effects usually is only 30–60 minutes. The primary uses of flumazenil are the management of suspected benzodiazepine overdose and the reversal of sedative effects produced by benzodiazepines administered during either general anesthesia or diagnostic and/or therapeutic procedures. The administration of a series of small injections is preferred to a single bolus injection. A total of 1 mg flumazenil given over 1–3 minutes usually is sufficient to abolish the effects of therapeutic doses of benzodiazepines; patients with suspected benzodiazepine overdose should respond adequately to a cumulative dose of 1–5 mg given over 2–10 minutes; a lack of response to 5-mg flumazenil strongly suggests that a benzodiazepine is not the major cause of sedation. Additional courses of treatment with flumazenil may be needed within 20–30 minutes should sedation reappear. Flumazenil is not effective in single-drug overdoses with either barbiturates or tricyclic antidepressants. To the contrary, administration of flumazenil in these settings may be associated with the onset of seizures, especially in patients poisoned with tricyclic antidepressants. Seizures or other withdrawal symptoms also may be precipitated in patients who had been taking benzodiazepines for protracted periods and in whom tolerance and/or dependence may have developed.
BARBITURATES
The barbiturates are derivatives of 2,4,6-trioxohexahydropyrimidine (Table 16–3) that reversibly depress the activity of all excitable tissues. The CNS is exquisitely sensitive, and even when barbiturates are given in anesthetic concentrations, direct effects on peripheral excitable tissues are weak. However, serious deficits in cardiovascular and other peripheral functions occur in acute barbiturate intoxication. Except for a few specialized uses, barbiturates have been replaced by the much safer benzodiazepines.
